an article in the Yale alumni magazine
told the story of Clyde Murphy a black
man who was a member of the class of
1970 Clyde was a success story after
Yale and a law degree from Columbia
quite spent the next 30 years as one of
America's top civil rights lawyers he
was also a great husband and father but
despite his success personally and
professionally quite story had a sad
ended in 2010 at the age of 62 who I
died from a blood clot in his lung quite
experience was not unique
many of his black classmates from Yale
also died young in fact the magazine
article indicated that 41 years after
graduation from Yale the black members
of the class of 1970 had a death rate
that was three times higher than that of
the average class member it's stunning
america has recently awakened to a
steady drumbeat of unarmed black men
being shot by the police what is even a
bigger story is that every 7th minute a
black person dies prematurely in the
United States that is over 200 black
people die every single day who would
not die if the health of blacks and
whites were equal for the last 25 years
I have been on a mission to understand
why does race matter so profoundly for
health when I started my career many
believed that it was simply about racial
differences in income and education I
discovered that while economic status
matters for health there is more to the
story so for example if we look at life
expectancy at age 25 at age 25 there's a
five-year gap between blacks and whites
and the gap by education for both whites
and blacks is even larger than the
racial gap at the same time at every
level of Education whites live longer
than blacks
so whites who are high school dropouts
with three point four years longer than
their black counterparts and the gap is
even larger among college graduates most
surprising of all whites who have
graduated from high school live longer
than blacks with a college degree or
more education so why does race matter
so profoundly for health what else is it
beyond education and income that might
matter in the early 1990s I was asked to
review a new book on the health of black
America I was struck that almost every
single one of its 25 chapters said that
racism was a factor that was hurtin the
health of blacks all of these
researchers were stating that racism was
a factor adversely impacting blacks but
they provided no evidence for me that
was not good enough a few months later I
was speaking at a conference in
Washington DC and I said that one of the
priorities for research was to document
the ways in which racism effect
else a white gentleman stood in the
audience and said that while he agreed
with me that racism was important we
could never measure racism we measure
self-esteem I said there is no reason
why we can't measure racism if we put
our minds to it and so I put my mind to
it and develop three scales the first
one captured major experiences of
discrimination like being unfairly fired
or being unfairly stopped by the police
but discrimination also occurs in more
minor and subtle experiences and so my
second scale called the everyday
discrimination scale captures nine items
that captures experiences like you're
treated with less courtesy than others
you receive Forest Service and others
and restaurants or stores or people act
as if they afraid of you this scale
captures ways in which the dignity and
the respect of people who society does
not value is chipped away on a daily
basis research has found that higher
levels of discrimination are associated
with the elevated risk of a broad range
of diseases from blood pressure to
abdominal the obesity to breast cancer
to heart disease and even premature
mortality strikingly some of the effects
are observed at a very young age for
example a study of black teens found
that those who reported higher levels of
discrimination as teenagers had higher
levels of stress hormones of blood
pressure and of weight at age 20 however
the stress of discrimination is only one
aspect discrimination and racism also
matters in other profound ways for
health for example there's
discrimination in medical care in 1999
the National Academy of Medicine asked
me to serve on a committee that document
that found concluded based on the
scientific evidence that blacks and
other minorities receive poorer quality
care than whites this was true for all
kinds of medical treatment from the most
simple to the most technologically
sophisticated one explanation for this
pattern was a phenomenon that's called
implicit bias or unconscious
discrimination research for decades by
social psychologists indicate that if
you hold a negative stereotype about a
group in your subconscious mind and you
meet someone from that group you will
discriminate against that person you
will treat them differently it's an
unconscious process it's an automatic
process it is a subtle process but it's
normal and it occurs even among the most
well intentioned individuals but the
deeper that I delved into the health
impact of racism the more insidious the
effects became there is institutional
discrimination which refers to
discrimination that exists in the
processes of social institutions
residential segregation by race which
has led to blacks and whites living in
very different neighborhood contexts is
a classic example of institutional
racism one of America's best-kept
secrets is how residential segregation
is the secret source that creates racial
inequality in the United States in
America where you live
determines your access to opportunities
in education and employment in housing
and even an access to medical care one
study of the hundred and seventy-one
largest cities in the United States
concluded that there is not even one
city where White's lives on the equal
conditions to blacks and that the worst
urban context in which whites reside is
considerably better than the average
context of black communities another
study found that if you could eliminate
statistically residential segregation
you would completely erase black-white
differences in income education and
unemployment and reduce black-white
differences in single motherhood by
two-thirds all of that driven by
segregation I have also learned how the
negative stereotypes and images of
blacks in our culture literally create
and sustain both institutional and
individual discrimination a group of
researchers have put together a database
that contains the books magazines and
articles that the average
college-educated American would read
over the lifetime it allows us to look
within this database and see how
Americans have seen words pair together
as they brought in this society so when
the word black appears in American
culture
what co-occurs with it poor violent
religious lazy cheerful dangerous when
white occurs the frequently co-occurring
words are wealthy progressive
conventional stubborn successful
educated so when a police officer
overreacts when he sees an unarmed black
male
and perceives him to be violent and
dangerous
we are not necessarily dealing with an
inherently bad cop we may be simply
viewing a normal American who is
reflecting what he has been exposed to
as a result of being raised in this
society from my own experience I believe
that your race does not have to be a
determinant of your destiny I migrated
to the United States from the Caribbean
island of st. Lucia in the late 1970s in
pursuit of higher education and in the
last 40 years I have done well I've had
a supportive family I have worked hard I
have done well but it took more for me
to be successful I received a minority
fellowship from the University of
Michigan yes I am an affirmative action
baby without affirmative action I would
not be here but in the last 40 years
black America has been less successful
than I have in 1978 black households in
the United States earned 59 cents for
every dollar of income
White's earn in 2015 black families
still earn 59 cents for every dollar of
income that white families received and
the racial gaps in wealth are even more
stunning for every dollar of wealth that
whites have that families have six
pennies and Latinos have seven pennies
the fact is racism is produced in a
truly rigged system that is
systematically disadvantaging some
racial groups in the United States
to paraphrase Plato there is nothing so
unfair as the equal treatment of unequal
people and that's why I am committed to
work in to dismantling racism I deeply
appreciate the fact that I am standing
on the shoulders of those who have
sacrificed even their lives to open the
doors that I have walked through I want
to ensure that those doors remain open
and that everyone can walk through those
doors Robert Kennedy said each time a
man a woman I would add stands up for an
ideal or acts to improve the lot of
others or strikes out against injustice
he sends forth a tiny ripple of Hope and
those ripples can build a current that
can sweep down the mightiest walls of
oppression and resistance I am
optimistic today because all across
America I have seen ripples of hope the
Boston Medical Center has added lawyers
to the medical team so that physicians
can improve the health of their patients
because the lawyers are addressing the
non-medical needs their patients have
Loma Linda University has built a
gateway college in nearby San Bernardino
so that in addition to delivering
medical care they can provide job skills
and job training to a predominantly
minority low-income community members so
that they will have the skills they need
to get a decent job in Chapel Hill North
Carolina the abecedarian project has
figured out how to ensure that fear of
lower the risk for heart disease for
blacks in their mid thirties by
providing high quality big-air from
birth to age five
in after-school centers across the
United States wintley phipps
and the US Dream Academy is breaking the
cycle of incarceration by providing high
quality academic enrichment and
mentoring to ensure to the children of
prisoners and children who are fallen
behind in school in Huntsville Alabama
awkward University the historically
black institution is showing how we can
improve the health of black adults by
including a self evaluation as a part of
freshman orientation and given those
students the tools they need to make
healthy choices and providing them
annually a health transfer so they can
monitor their progress and in Atlanta
Georgia
purpose-built communities has dismantled
the negative effects of segregation by
transforming a crime ridden drug
infested public housing project into an
oasis of mixed income housing of
academic performance of great community
wellness and a full employment and
finally there is the divine solution
professor Patricia Devine of the
University of Wisconsin has shown us how
we can attack our hidden biases head-on
and effectively reduce them each one of
us can be a ripple of hope this work
will not always be easy but former
Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall
has told us we must defend we must
dissent from the indifference we must
dissent from the apathy
we must dissent from the hatred under
the mistrust we must be sent because
America can do better because America
has no choice but to do better thank you
[Applause]